Antonios Kaldellis emails

Christian Crumlish <xian@pobox.com>

￼
Sat, Jul 26, 7:59 AM
Hello, Professor Kaldellis!

(I kind of miss your old "Hello, the Internet" sign on!)

You do not know me, but I am a fan and reader of yours and we have a few acquaintances in common. (My old philosophy department friend Justin D'arms tells me you both served in the academic bureaucracy together, and I was delighted to hear the voice of another old classmate, the inimitable Dan Caner on one of your early episodes when I was catching up.)

I am listening to your latest pod and aware you are on holiday right now. There is no urgency here, but you mentioned looking at people's screenplays and treatments and while I do not have a film project in mind, I recently (to be honest, while re-reading/listening to Stream of Gold, Rivers of Blood on Audible) had a whole narrative framework drop into my mind and then refuse to leave until I did a little bit of basic groundwork about it.

The idea is to follow the perspective of a young Lombard scribe who accompanies Liutprand on his first embassy and somehow gets left behind. He gradually becomes Roman as he is taken on by the court, gradually becoming known to Phokas just before the coup. By the time of the second embassy he has basically gone native and he then accompanies Theophanu (whom he has essentially grown up with, and because she isn't attested we can play with her actual background, etc.) back to Otto's court.

Those are just the bare bones, but having heard of your generosity in this regard, and remembering that closed mouths don't get fed, I steeled myself to ask whether you might be willing, at your convenience, to look at some of the "world building" materials I've been working on to flesh out this story, and perhaps correct me where I am astray or have been misled and otherwise offer your thoughts on the context and grounding.

My ideal sort of historical fictions honors what we know as best a we can and then explores the open spaces to explain or otherwise connect things.

If you're game, I can share more, but I do not want to be importunate and I hope the rest of your summer is relaxing!

—

Hello Christian,

I suppose that I did set myself up when I said that I talk to all-comers about their scripts, didn’t I? Look, I’m happy to talk with you about it, or look at your materials, but I will repeat what I said to Ada: you need to focus on the themes, plot, and character to make a good story. The historical setting etc. are incidental. You need good characters, by which I mean you should be able to answer the following question: Why are you telling a story about this character? And what does the story reveal about this character in a way that other people should care? Is the character’s interest limited to the tenth century or do the themes resonate today too?

But, a I said, the literary / cinematic qualities are not my bailiwick. I am but a humble historian who can check your facts and make suggestions, perhaps only trivial ones. So how can I help?

Best wishes
Anthony



—



Hello, Antonios!

> I suppose that I did set myself up when I said that I talk to all-comers about their scripts, didn’t I?
 
 I feel guilty now about interrupting your Greek summer!

> Look, I’m happy to talk with you about it, or look at your materials, but I will repeat what I said to Ada:

btw, that was a real banger! I need to read some of Ada's s-f novels. The way she talks... well I'm guessing we are of a similar age.
 
> You need to focus on the themes, plot, and character to make a good story. The historical setting etc. are incidental.

I do understand this. The "world building" aspect of fiction is no substitute for character, motivation, plot, etc. In some ways it is the background and scene setting, but I do want that to be accurate or current and for the lack of a less-cringy term, "Kaldellist."
 
> You need good characters, by which I mean you should be able to answer the following question: Why are you telling a story about this character? And what does the story reveal about this character in a way that other people should care? Is the character’s interest limited to the tenth century or do the themes resonate today too?

Yes, I have fixed on a main character and am delving deeply into his motivations, what he wants, his pre-conceived notions about himself, his identity, the legacy of Rome, etc. I believe many of these themes will resonate. I am not a didact and won't hit people over the head, but I do hope that like all fiction it will speak to my contemporaries through a recognizable lens. (A examplar is Patrick O'Brien imho who gives the illusion of total immersion in early 19th British culture but does it deftly by understanding what a 20th reader would know, be confused by, need explanation for, would find amusing or naughty, etc.
 

> But, a I said, the literary / cinematic qualities are not my bailiwick. I am but a humble historian who can check your facts and make suggestions, perhaps only trivial ones. So how can I help?

I'd like to share a few details I've been gathering by doing light research on publicly available info. I can attach a few documents to this effect. What I don't want to do is impose unduly or expect you to mark anything up. If in perusing what I share you did happen to notice clearly incorrect or misleading or misunderstood ideas, or if anything I'm pulling together triggers an association you think I ought to consider, such notes would be welcome. 

Frankly, you owe me nothing and I already feel in your debt, so any response from "Sorry, I never got around to reading that" through "Yep, read it, no notes," to anything would be appreciated.

I'm also playing around with title ideas, and have been trying epistrophikon on for size but suspect it won't appeal to readers.

I will go ahead and attach some documents now just to be efficient. Please, take your time and do not feel any sense of obligation at all!

Here's a description of the attachments:
1. To situate my narrative primarily between the two narratives, I wanted to get a sense of what we actually do know about encounters between New Rome and the empire of the Germans in a century centered on that period. This first doc is a synthesized timeline. Does it miss anything good? Does it get stuff wrong?
2. I also wanted to explore a theme of language as instrument of power and a primal form of magic, especially when combined with the theatre of mystery and glamor etc., to connect a young scribe's fascination with words, spelling, and spells to the court pomp and power display of Constantinople, and have a sort of synthetic report on that topic that I'd love to know how accurate or apt it is.
3. The last thing is I am playing around with my character's name and have the idea that it might evolve as his circumstances change and I put together a kind of sequence and would love to know if the Greek name(s) he ends up bearing later in life make sense?
OK, that's it! My primary job is to write one scene and see if this really has legs for me or is just so far an interesting world-building thought experiment (or, idk, maybe a video game or graphic novel? it's really just a story arc for me so far.)

Thanks again, and especially for your podcast and books (I am still only 1/3 of the way through the lastest tome, and bought it again on Kindle because it was crushing my chest at night, haha. Will there be an audiobook? I might need to resort to being read to by the end.)

Take care,

    --𝒳ian

—

Ok, I’ll take a look. By the way, what languages can you read, ancient and modern?

Anthony
—

Pretty much just English :\

French from 2nd to 8th grade didn’t really take
Latin from 7th grade through college but I still usually needed a trot
Dabbled in ancient Greek with my Latin teacher in 8th grade but didn’t get far
Two semesters of German in college that also didn’t take but helped me navigate mitteleuropa when I visited a bit
Some restaurant and street Spanish from spending half my life in California

So I am pretty much reliant on translation, but I am fascinated by linguistics and have spent some time geeking out on proto-Indo-European and its descendants.

My undergraduate degree was in philosophy and that was the end of my formal schooling.

x

—
Oh, and one very basic questiom is what sort of pen a scribe would have used in the 10th c, the type he might be constantly having to sharpen?


—

Some minor historical comments in the attached.

[PDF added to project knowledge separately]


A



For the court and court life, see the papers in the following volumes:


Maguire, Henry, (ed.), Byzantine Court Culture from 829-1204, Dumbarton Oaks, Washington D.C., 1997.

Ödekan, Ayla, Nevra Necipoǧlu, and Engin Akyürek, eds., The Byzantine Court: Source of Power and Culture (Papers from the International Svgi Gönül Bbyzantine Studies Symposium), Istanbul: Koç University Press, 2013.

Dawson, Timothy, illustrations by Graham Sumner, By the Emperor’s Hand: Military Dress and Court Regalia in the Later Roman-Byzantine Empire (Barnsley, S. Yorkshire: Frontline Books 2015).

Beihammer, A., S. Constantinou, and M. Parani, eds., Court Ceremonies and Rituals of Power in Byzantium and the Medieval Mediterranean: Comparative Perspectives, Brill 2013.

—

Will do! Thank you again!

I had the pleasure of dropping by Dumbarton Oakes when I last visited DC amd saw some stunning pieces exhibited.
